analyze and think about. And he burned a little, but it was all right.
Everything was all right!

When Ed came out to the main part of the blockhouse again, Randy knew
from his expression that he'd been checked out for the flight, but he
asked politely:

"Mother and child doing well?"

By that time McCauley wanted to hug somebody for sheer joy, but instead
he said sedately,

"The doc says I'm a boy."

But just the same he was almost weak from the reaction to the ending of
his fears about what the doctors might decide. He looked at his watch.
Just about on schedule. Over in a corner somebody with a headphone
and chest mike was marking off items on a list he had before him. He
said, "Telemeter circuits," and paused. A voice evidently sounded in
his headphones, because he made a checkmark with his pencil. Then he
said, "Tracker circuits," and waited, and made another checkmark. As
McCauley walked on to where his voice was drowned out, he was still
saying toneless things into his chest mike and making checkmarks after
unhearable replies.

Randy closed the door of the cubicle where McCauley would put on the
grav-suit. It was skin-tight and festooned all over with stray bits of
equipment. Randy helped him get into it.

"Lucky son-of-a-gun!" he said conversationally. "How do the Irish get
all the breaks?"

"Clean living," McCauley told him, "and a drag with the top brass."

It wasn't so, of course. Not the top brass part, anyhow.

His arm caught in the right sleeve and Randy helped him straighten
it. There were peculiar tubes built into the fabric. They were all
hooked to a grav-valve that would let compressed air into them at a
suitable pressure to tighten the suit and fight the tendency of his
blood and inner organs to be left behind when his bones and flesh were
accelerated by the full thrust of the rocket. A man wasn't built to
stand the acceleration he had to take. But the grav-suit would make up
the difference.

He turned slowly around, and Randy inspected everything with the
jealous care of somebody who'll never forgive himself if anything goes
wrong. Presently he said:

"Flip it--but be careful!"

McCauley touched the test-stud. The tubes expanded. The suit tightened.
It felt as if it were going to try to squeeze his whole body out
through the neck. He lifted his hand and the squeezing stopped. Randy
screwed up the test-stud so it couldn't flip on by accident. He felt
of the chute-pack that was part of the suit, with the wide straps that
went around McCauley's body and thighs. He checked the four trailing
cables--each with a different-shaped plug on its end--that would pass
along all the suit-instrumentation news to the telemeter transmitter.

Then Randy nodded worriedly and gave McCauley a cigarette.

"It looks okay," he said. But he fretted.

"Everything's okay," said McCauley.

He puffed contentedly. When the cigarette was half-smoked, somebody
tapped on the door.

"You can get aboard, Lieutenant."

McCauley stood up. Randy opened the door for him and he went ambling
clumsily through the blockhouse toward the exit. He heard a toneless
voice say: "Crash wagon two"; then the man listened and made a
checkmark. Somebody else snapped: "Tell the idiot that we're trying to
keep him out of range of a few tons of hardware that'll be coming down
out of the sky presently. Sit on his head!" That would be the official
response to the civilian motorist's objection to being kept safely off
the test site when a shoot was on.

McCauley went on out into the open air. He felt weighty and clumsy
and cumbersome. He went around the blockhouse and into the blazing
sunshine. The fueling crew was finished, but they hadn't left. They
waited to watch him go aboard. There was a ladder leaning against the
Aerobee. McCauley plodded heavily to the foot of it. He put his foot on
the first rung and turned to Randy.

"Here I go."

"Yeah," said Randy. He didn't smile. He couldn't. But he did have a
fine air of nonchalance as he said, "See you soon."

There was no handshake. It would have been too much like saying
good-by. McCauley started up the ladder.

It was a long climb; and three-quarters of the way up, with all the
assorted gimmicks and the clumsy chute-pack banging against his
buttocks, he began to breathe fast. Once he stepped on a trailing
cable. He looked down and was annoyed to find that the height bothered
him--a man who would presently be up many miles higher than any man had
ever been before. And this was only tens of feet, yet he felt giddy! He
didn't look down again.

He reached the door in the nose-cone and climbed in. He'd practiced
it. He felt easier when he was inside. Up here, on top of several tons
of rocket fuel, he felt safer because there was a floor under him. He
grimaced at the foolishness of it. Rocket fuel is highly explosive;
a rocket works because a continuous explosion is taking place in its
engine. But McCauley felt safer sitting on enough hydrazine and nitric
to blow him to atoms than coming up a narrow, springy ladder.

Laboriously he settled himself. The acceleration chair had been
tailored to fit him in this suit. He got the trailing cables clear and
made himself comfortable. Then he waited. He could stir a little, but
not much. It was, of course, extremely comforting to be able to move
his feet in even limited swings.

The nose-cone door darkened. Somebody reached in and plugged the cables
into their proper sockets. He hauled straps from nowhere and buckled
them.

"Here's your helmet, Lieutenant," he said.

"Thanks," said McCauley.

He put it on. Air began to flow past his face and he knew that all the
gadgets in his suit were hooked in, and that back in the blockhouse
they could count his breaths and tell how deep they were, they were
getting a continuous cardiogram to tell how his heart was working, and
they had a running record of his blood pressure. If he panicked now
they'd know it. The man outside the nose-cone door poked around like
a hen fussing over a solitary chick. McCauley wished he'd go away. A
voice sounded in the helmet earphones.

"_Checking phones. Do you hear me?_"

"Sure," said McCauley. "I hear all right."

The phones clicked and were silent. The nose-cone door closed and
McCauley was alone. Somehow he felt naked, because he knew that
everything he felt and almost everything he thought was going on record
via telemeter in the blockhouse. It was dark here.... No, two small
electric bulbs were glowing. One was a spare. He saw the stuff laid out
for later.

He knew what went on outside, but it was what was going on inside
him that disturbed him. He didn't want the instruments in his suit
to report anything wrong. He wanted to do this job right! For that
reason he was consciously patient while he knew that men clinging to
the launching tower were pulling away the last-minute cords that had
been reporting everything functioning just right. Then everybody'd
be getting out of the way. The Aerobee stood silent and still above
a concrete pit filled with water. Somebody would use a last few
seconds to coil up a cable that should have been put away before.
In seconds now, though, everyone would pop out of sight. Over by the
mountains they'd be working the trackers there to make sure they were
all right. There'd be the warning blast. It ought to be about now.
Ten--nine--eight--

A voice came into the helmet phones.

"_Forty seconds more, Lieutenant. Everything's going fine so far!_"

McCauley had a momentary impulse to try to make some crack or other
that would be appropriate, express how he felt, and so on. But he
didn't feel as he'd expected to. And anything like that would sound
like showing off. So he just answered matter-of-factly:

"That's good."

He waited. And waited. And waited. And waited.

The voice in his helmet phones said abruptly:

"_Ten seconds ... Nine ... Eight ... Seven ... Six ... Five ...
Four ... Three ... Two ... One...._"

During the last second McCauley remembered to put his arms in the
armrests, because the acceleration was going to be all he could take.
_All._ If his arms hung down, the blood would engorge his fingers and
swell them to uselessness. He was already scrounged down in place, and
he had his chin in the chinrest of the helmet--the whole helmet had a
fitting to support it--so if he blacked out his tongue wouldn't slide
back down his throat and strangle him.

Something hit him. It hit him all over at the same instant, as if he
were being slammed in a million places by a million six-ounce gloves
all at once. Something grabbed his legs and squeezed his belly and
blew air in his face, and the roar was numbing, but he didn't remember
hearing it begin. He'd expected all of it but he reacted by quite
automatically getting raging mad. He knew he was on the way up and he
felt thrilled and furious and he hurt all over, simultaneously.

It was agony, but if he could have grinned he'd have done it.
Everything had gone off all right! Nothing was wrong! It was too late
for anything to stop the shoot now! It was happening!

His stomach felt terrifically tight against the corset-like front of
the grav-suit. The legs squeezed--hard! That puff of wind was extra air
pressure to protect his lungs. He suffered, and he was half blind, and
he fought for breath, but that extra air pressure helped a lot. All the
blood tried to come down out of his brain and his cheeks sagged and his
ears would have flopped down if it weren't for the headphones holding
them flat against his head.

Suddenly things were easier. The booster'd burned out and dropped
off. McCauley remembered to grunt, to say that he hadn't lost
consciousness in the first intolerable getaway acceleration. The two
small electric bulbs had seemed to turn reddish. He made a mental note
to mention it presently. The pressure was still monstrous. He seemed
to weigh tons--actually he did weigh an appreciable part of one--but
his weight was less than it had been. That first slamming was the
take-off, lasting barely seconds though it felt like long minutes. This
second-stage acceleration would last more than a minute. It would seem
like hours.

It did. McCauley's muscles were already getting weary of lifting
his whole chest for breathing when a voice said in the phones:
"_Beautiful shoot! Beautiful! Everything's going fine!_" He grunted
in acknowledgment. It would be too much effort to talk. Also he felt
an obscure anger, which was his body's reaction to the unreasonable
suffering imposed upon it. A little green light flashed, and he was
supposed to grunt at it, and he did.

He grunted a second time when it flashed again. Quickly. A third and
fourth and fifth time. Something would be learned from the quickness
with which he could respond to signals during this second-stage thrust.
A pause, and the green light flashed and kept on flashing too fast for
him to respond, and he said, "Cripes!" very wearily. Then it stopped.

The roaring went on and on, and abruptly there were violent coughings
below. Instantly his head tried to split wide open because the
acceleration ceased between two heartbeats, while his heart kept on
trying to pump blood against a static head which was many times normal,
and suddenly there was no static head at all. There was no gravity to
be pumped against. There was no weight to anything. Then his heart
tried to adjust to that, and it skipped beats, and all his insides that
had been dragged downward now rose up and tried to climb out of his
throat.

He gagged and swallowed.

"Okay!" he panted. "In free fall! The light changed to reddish but it's
back to normal. I feel fighting mad. Over."

"_First puzzle_," said a brisk voice in the headphones.

McCauley reached out into the arrangement of objects before him. He
took out a puzzle. It wasn't complicated, but he had to recognize it
and then remember how to do it. He tossed it aside, finished, and his
working time was undoubtedly recorded. The voice said:

"_Name two things in the same class among these: robin, shovel, tree,
ibis, shark._"

McCauley answered. Again the time was noted. This was straight IQ
stuff, to see how soon and how well his brain was functioning after the
beating he'd taken in the booster-stage take-off and the second-stage
acceleration of the rocket itself. He knew what it was all about,
even when they told him to solve puzzle six, and then four, and then
asked more silly questions. He responded as well as he could, with
no idea how good that was. But he felt a great irrational anger and
indignation. When he was asked to recite a paragraph of prose he'd
memorized for the exact purpose of reciting it, on demand, he recited
it. But he was unreasonably angry. It was his body's response to the
suffering just past.

Presently he snapped:

"Doggone it, I want to see something!"

"_Go ahead_," said the voice from the ground. "_But keep on talking. It
doesn't matter what you say. Talk._"

He pressed the button that slid the port shutters aside. The shutters
were necessary. There'd been terrific heat outside when the nose-cone
flung upward through the denser lower atmosphere near ground level. He
looked eagerly out.

For a moment he couldn't speak. He saw the horizon as an almost white
line against a star-specked black sky. It was curved! There were
innumerable flecks of whiteness--they'd be clouds--below him; they grew
thicker farther away. He saw the ocean, which was hundreds of miles
away. The world visibly tilted downwards, downhill away from him. He
looked below and it was paradoxically a bowl. Quite close he saw a
fleeting, rushing, tormented spurt of vapor which vanished instantly.
It was a steam-jet correcting yaw or spin or tumbling, up here where
the air was so thin that the fins themselves could take no grip on it.

Years ago, when a WAC corporal made the first flight up to the then
incredible height of two hundred and fifty miles, the machine turned
end for end five times as it rose, and its tumbling made no difference.
It was practically in a vacuum. McCauley was higher than that, already.
But this Aerobee pointed straight, balanced by little puffings of
steam. It didn't even rotate.

He could see stars all around, and then he turned to the one filtered
port and looked at the sun through it. It was a monstrous brilliance,
with writhing fire-fringes around its edges. He saw Mercury off to
its right. It was the first time in his life that he'd ever seen that
planet, and he'd had to get out of the atmosphere to do it. Not one
person in ten thousand has ever seen the sun's closest satellite, even
as a tiny speck of light in the sky. But McCauley saw it, not hidden by
the daytime sky. There was no air here to speak of. At this height a
man not in a pressure-tight cabin, trying to breathe what few molecules
of air were present, would die in thirteen seconds because of anoxia
and explosive decompression. He'd die no more quickly out between the
galaxies.

"_Keep talking_," said the voice in the headphones. "_Keep talking,
man!_"

McCauley found himself stammering. What he said wasn't particularly
coherent, and he knew his taped speech would be studied to find out
exactly what mental state he was in. The headphones asked questions.
Could he see this? Could he see that? He answered yes and no. The voice
asked him to write something. He did, not looking at it. He stared
out at the monstrousness of the universe, with Earth merely a dimpled
gigantic ball below him.

He had no weight, but he did not notice. He gazed and gazed and
exulted, and absent-mindedly obeyed the orders which came insistently
to his ears. He wanted to saturate his mind and his memory with the
sight that nobody had ever seen before, except in pictures taken at
this height by robots.

Presently the sky wasn't totally black with innumerable tiny lights in
it. It was a deep, dark purple. The stars seemed fainter. He said so.

"_Right_," said the voice in his helmet. "_You reached peak altitude
minutes ago. You're well on the way back down, now. We're going to turn
the rocket over._"

He realized the absolute silence about him by the fact that now he
heard trivial, insignificant noises. Steam-jets came on--hydrogen
peroxide sprayed into a catalysis chamber where it broke down instantly
into steam and gas. The product rushed out the fin-tip jets. The
universe visibly turned upside down; the sky was down beyond his feet,
and the singular, unfamiliar object which was Earth could be seen only
when he craned his neck to look upward.

He felt no difference, of course. He'd had no weight before, and he had
none now. The appearance of Earth changed so gradually that he didn't
really realize that he was approaching it. But he knew it in his mind,
and he resented bitterly that he had passed the high point of this
achievement and was now bound back toward the commonplace, the ordinary.

He made an effort to become his normal self. "Now I suspect I'm getting
scared," he said wryly into his helmet mike. If he admitted it he'd
be ashamed and so could fight it. But he found that he wasn't really
scared. He was apprehensive, as one is when approaching a dentist's
chair. He felt reluctant, because he knew that after he got down he'd
be due for ghastly, tedious days during which the doctors would go over
him almost with microscopes to hunt for sputters--the burned, exploded
patches that would show up where cosmic-ray particles not slowed by air
went through his body. There shouldn't be any, but there could be some.
Robot instruments said no sputters. But a man had to come up here to
make sure.

He felt something--a featherweight of pull toward the pointed tip of
the nose-cone. The rocket had hit air which slowed it enough so he
noticed it. He was astounded that he'd come back so far so fast. True,
he was still almost unthinkably high by the standards of other men, but
he'd been out in space!

Earth was deplorably near. At twenty miles up--a hundred-odd thousand
feet--the processes for landing him should begin. He settled himself
in his seat against what was coming.... He suddenly realized that he'd
been talking, though he didn't remember what he'd said. Undoubtedly,
though, he'd said everything that came into his head. He stopped. The
headphone voice said encouragingly, "_You're okay!_"

"So far!" he answered.

There was the story about the optimist who fell off a skyscraper.
Twenty stories earthward he saw someone looking out a window and
called, "Everything's fine so far!" Yes....

There was an explosion and he started. Then others. They came from
small, half-pound explosive charges set at carefully chosen places on
the rocket. They were there to wreck its streamlined shape; to make
it an irregular, dynamically inefficient object which would offer
enormously increased resistance to its own fall through the air.
Technically it was considered that the terminal speed-of-fall of the
shattered rocket would be less than that of a man falling free without
a parachute. What was that? A hundred and fifty miles an hour, or a
hundred and twenty? McCauley tensed himself.

It seemed that something broke loose. The rocket reeled. It plunged.
It turned end over end and McCauley was flung intolerably this way
and that against the straps that held him in his seat. A wallop
nearly snapped his neck. But this was the way it was supposed to be.
Streamlined, the rocket would have struck nose-first and buried itself
in small fragments in the sandy soil below. This way....

It mushed. It wabbled. It tumbled as crazily as a maple leaf and as
dizzily. McCauley steeled himself to endure it. "_Sixteen more miles of
this!_" he thought.

But it was nearly over. There was another flash of explosive, this
time nearby, and the nose-cone flew violently apart and a blast of
wind hit him. Then there was a thump--a terrific thump--and a no less
bone-shaking bump, and his acceleration seat was ejected and he was
flying free through nothingness. Then the straps miraculously came
loose and he was turning end for end; Earth and sky were playing
merry-go-round in all directions simultaneously, while something
ungainly and monstrous writhed crazily away from him and toward the
agile Earth. And then there was a jolt and a jerk and another jerk....

He swung widely, but right-side up, beneath a perfectly commonplace
government-issue parachute a mere three miles high. He was sore and
bruised and shaken and dizzy, but everything was perfectly all right.
He'd been ejected from the falling rocket just as instruments had been
ejected hundreds of times before, and an ordinary parachute had opened
to let him sink tranquilly and safely to the ground, just as it had
done with the instruments.

He was remarkably close to solidity now. He got his breath and saw the
mountains and the vast, ridged, sun-baked, mesquite-dotted ground of
the rocket site. He could see the officers'-quarters building where
he'd had breakfast this morning. He spotted the blockhouse, with the
spindling launching tower from which he had departed so recently.

Then he saw a trail of dust flowing across the ground below. It was the
pickup gang. He'd been tracked every second, and they'd be underneath
when he touched ground. Randy would be there, and the other men who'd
give their eyeteeth to have taken his place. But they'd be gloating
because he'd gotten back all right. They'd be grinning, swearing,
exultant, overjoyed....

It suddenly occurred to McCauley that it would be intolerable if they
weren't glad. He didn't feel proud himself. He hadn't done anything.
He'd just gone for a ride that they'd made possible. But all the same
he was filled to bursting with the goodness of what had happened.

He saw the whole thing in perspective now. Swinging below the
parachute, he could estimate with fine precision just what had taken
place. It had become possible for a man to go up to the edge of
emptiness, to where he could look with his own eyes upon the sun and
stars in their own unshielded splendor. And because a man could do it,
a man had to.

And he'd been the man.

He felt overwhelmingly good as he settled, swaying, under the white
blossom of nylon cloth, with the pickup gang streaking in half a dozen
vehicles toward the place where he would land. Long plumes of yellow
dust followed each one.

Earth came floating up to meet him.




                                  _2_


    (When Ed McCauley was still a reasonably young officer, there were
    many commonplace things that hadn't been done yet. Satellites
    circled the earth from west to east and across both poles and with
    other assorted orbits. There were artificial satellites in orbit
    even around the sun, and every so often somebody put up a new one
    for some new purpose. There'd been a landing on the moon--by
    robot--and a robot station there spasmodically reported temperatures
    and cosmic-ray frequency, and a surprising number of moonquakes.

    But even so, many things hadn't yet been done. Man had circled the
    earth in capsules, but not yet had any man lifted his own rocketship
    from Earth and set himself in orbit. Still less had any man risen
    into space as the captain of his ship and brought it back to earth.
    Until such a thing was done, it would be absurd to speak of
    spaceships. Missiles, yes. Satellites, yes. But a ship had to take
    off and land on its own before men could say there is such a thing
    as a spaceship.)

Young Major McCauley arrived at Quartermain Base in an Air Transport
ship which stopped briefly to drop him off and toss out a mail sack
which was instantly taken in charge by two side-armed noncoms and
hauled away. Then the Transport ship bellowed vociferously and took
off across the incredibly level pebbly plain, lifted and retracted its
wheels, and soared up into the infinitely blue sky of this part of
the world. It left McCauley standing in a vast emptiness, except for
unimpressive base buildings. He felt singularly lonely.

Nobody paid any attention to him. There was nobody left around. In a
way it was a relief, because McCauley had experienced much too much
attention once upon a time, and he wanted no more of it. He'd done a
job in an Aerobee once, and now he was to try something in an X-21 that
a lot of people would have liked to try in his place. He preferred not
to be reminded of either thing. So quite uncomplainingly he trudged
across the sun-baked flat ground toward the base buildings. All around
there was astounding flatness. The low hills that rose at the far side
of this dry lakebed were conspicuous here, whereas in more rolling
country they'd never be noticed. There was a row of hangars. McCauley
picked one out with his eyes and guessed that the new ship might be
inside it.

He reached the building behind the flagpole and shifted his bag from
one hand to the other. He went in, mopping his forehead as the door
closed behind him and the sharp chill of air conditioning hit him.
