his own view he couldn't do anything but try to bargain for his own
life if--but he thought of it as when--McCauley murdered or abandoned
the others in emptiness.

McCauley told Randy the whole business, of course. As second-in-command
Randy needed to know everything.

"He's a swine," Randy said distastefully. "But it took nerve to try to
bluff through our training period, with the voyage out here to follow
it."

"He's in bad shape," said McCauley. "However he got started that way,
he chose to be a crook at some time or another. He probably thought
it was smart. It wasn't, but now he can't think the way a non-crook
thinks."

Randy frowned, thinking.

"I believe," Randy said slowly, "that I'll explain to the others. He's
with us and the way he thinks has to be allowed for. They won't let him
know they're on to him.... I feel sorry for the poor devil. You will,
too, when you think it over. They'll feel the same way."

McCauley nodded. Space is no place for the self-righteous or the
intolerant. Charity is a requisite for the endurance of journey in
emptiness, in closed tin cans with re-breathed air and enforced
exasperating contact with other persons. The Mars Expedition members
had been chosen for personality traits as well as technical
competence. It was remarkable that Fallon had been able to imitate his
brother's character well enough to avoid unmasking before take-off.

The work of the Expedition went on. In the half-hour day, the rockets
for Mars were loaded and set up for firing. Immediately after darkness
fell, they went streaking away from the small, misshapen asteroid.
McCauley or Randy at the control board picked up their monitor signals
one by one, verified their course and speed, and made such adjustments
as would be needed to get them to the planet which men now ought to
reach a good twenty years ahead of schedule. Near Mars, they'd be swung
into orbit and landed one by one.

It became routine. But it was a hair-raising routine. There was a
tissue-thin difference between the success and failure that meant
life or death. What rest they took was in snatches. But things went
along. Curiously enough, when Hathaway and Brett and Soames were told
in confidence of Fallon's self-produced predicament, it amounted to
easing the tension their continuous labor might have produced. They had
something to think about besides the nerve-racking need for absolute
accuracy and absolute care in all they did out of the ship. Crawling
about under the cargo nets was harrowing. There were the stars. There
was the feeling of absolute emptiness, into which their sensations
assured them that they were falling unendingly.

But Fallon had no relief as the others did. He didn't have their
purpose. They were risking their lives to accomplish something they
wanted to do. That was why they were here. But Fallon was with them in
flight from the law. He had only fear to sustain him.

Three-fourths of the rockets had been released. Nine-tenths. There were
more than forty rockets aground on Mars and the ship was refueled, and
already it would be possible to leave Eros and land on Mars and set up
the base and do the work the Expedition was expected to do. They could
do all this and then return to Earth. The rockets still in space and on
Eros amounted to a margin beyond necessity, and every extra one that
landed would increase the surplus of equipment and supplies.

And then Fallon got lost. He was never out of sight of the others, but
he got lost. It was the rule, of course, for every man to have his own
life line securely fastened to solidity. They were long life lines to
permit movement about the cargo cache and the much-diminished heaps of
stores. They were inconvenient, but they were starkly necessary. It was
strictly forbidden for any man at any time not to be safely tethered.
And....

A rocket was to be made ready for firing. Its cargo was brought to
it, item by item. Fallon had worked with the others. He was treated
with singular forbearance by his shipmates. There came a moment when
somebody had to shift his space-rope anchorage. It happened to be
Fallon who needed to do this. Soames took hold of Fallon's space rope
in the middle and held it firmly while Fallon shifted the end to
another anchorage. Fallon was nervous, worried. He finished the task
quickly and went on toward the cargo items he was to move.

McCauley, prowling on his perpetual task of inspection, saw the knot
Fallon had made. He said sharply:

"Fallon, stop moving and hold on to something solid."

Fallon swung about and stared apprehensively. He clung to an anchor
rod sunk in the metal of the asteroid. McCauley made sure he was safe,
untied the space-rope knot, and tied it more securely.

"It was a bad knot," said McCauley. "You're safe now."

McCauley went on. This was outside the cargo-netted space and near
where the rockets went up. Fallon clung fast to the drill rod. The
others went about their business. Stars blazed in the daylight sky. The
sun flamed far, far away. Fallon stayed motionless, gripping the rod
that was securely set into the metal of Eros.

Presently he stirred stealthily and tugged at the rope with the new
knot in the end. It was firm. He tugged more strongly. It held. Then,
with the gentlest and most fearful of tuggings, he drew himself to
where McCauley had fastened his space rope. He examined McCauley's
knot. Fallon was afraid of McCauley, because he had made a bargain he
did not believe McCauley would keep. He believed that McCauley meant
to be the sole survivor of the Mars Expedition, returning secretly to
Earth with tens of millions in stolen atomic fuel.

And Fallon believed that McCauley had planned the near-tragedies of
Hathaway and Soames. Therefore he believed that McCauley would be
arranging more successful accidents for those two and the rest, and
that because Fallon knew of McCauley's plans, he, Fallon, would be the
first to be destroyed.

He could see nothing the matter with the knot, but he distrusted it
with a despairing terror.

He untied it so he could retie it himself. And McCauley's voice roared
in the headphones in his helmet:

"Fallon! What are you doing?"

Fallon started violently. He jumped. His space rope was not anchored,
and Eros has no measurable gravity. Fallon went up and away from the
asteroid, toward a thousand million light-years of emptiness. His space
rope rose with him, not trailing behind but writhing and twisting
weightlessly, more like a tendril of smoke than anything else. Horror
filled him. He could not cry out.

"Get him!" roared McCauley.

Space-suited figures turned in the stark white sunlight, and inky black
shadows followed their movements in strict synchrony. Fallon was twenty
feet high.... Forty. A space-suited figure jerked at his space rope
for assurance and then leaped up toward Fallon. It was a miss. The
glittering metallic space suit swung in a wide arc and then down to
ground again. A second man leaped. A third. They swept past the line of
his flight. The space rope of one of the men touched Fallon's. Had it
struck near the middle, it might have brought his rope down captive.
But the end of Fallon's rope flicked free and he went on toward the
stars.

Now there were babblings. Space-armored figures moved swiftly toward
a single spot, pulling themselves by their ropes.... Fallon was sixty
feet high.... Seventy.

Then a man came soaring straight upward. He missed Fallon, but he
flailed a rope and it tangled in Fallon's. The bobbing, rope-held
figure hauled in, and had Fallon's rope fast. He wrapped it swiftly
about his arm. When the jerk came it was not severe.

Then a single figure on the asteroid pulled down and down and down,
and Fallon was towed to solidity. He touched before he could utter a
sound.

McCauley was the man who'd hauled him back. The others crouched or
squatted down, holding fast to the metallic projections from the
surface of Eros. They'd given up their ropes to make a rope long enough
for his rescue. While one went after him and McCauley stood erect to
draw him back, the others held fast by their fingertips to keep from
sharing his predicament. They'd risked floating away as helplessly as
he himself, in order that their life lines might be used to save him.

McCauley did not reprimand Fallon, but he pointedly thanked the others
for the promptness with which they'd acted.

Later, Randy asked vexedly:

"What was the matter with Fallon? He knew he shouldn't have unfastened
his rope!"

"His knot wasn't good, and I retied it," said McCauley dryly. "But
he thinks I intend to kill everybody, probably him first. So when I
meddled with his life rope he thought I was arranging his death. He
meant to retie the knot to defeat my evil intention."

"He's a fool!" snapped Randy. "We'd better have it out with him, or
there's no telling what he'll do next!"

"I'm afraid I have to," McCauley said distastefully. "He'll be
humiliated when he finds out I was humoring him. But get him, anyhow."

There was a clanking sound somewhere in the ship. The inner air-lock
door closed. There were noises that told of the sealing dogs being
tightened. Then, immediately, the outside lock door opened. Randy went
to find Fallon. He came back, disturbed.

"Fallon just went outside. He's supposed to be off-duty, too."

McCauley frowned. Then he flipped the outside-communicator switch.
As a matter-of-fact precaution, there was two-way communication with
emptiness whenever anybody was outside the ship. Anything that came
in was immediately heard from speakers all over the ship, so that the
control room did not have to be manned all the time work was proceeding
on the planetoid's surface. If an emergency arose, everybody anywhere
in the ship would know immediately.

"Fallon," said McCauley curtly into the outside transmitter, "you're
wanted. Come back, please."

Silence. No answer. There was only darkness outside the ship now. Stars
moved steadily up from the blackness that was one nearby horizon, and
down to the blackness that was the other. The red disk of Mars--very
near, now--was the brightest object in the heavens.

"Fallon!" snapped McCauley. "You're wanted! Return to the ship
immediately!"

A clanking sound came from all the loud-speakers inside the ship. Then
Fallon's voice.

"Wait a minute." He panted as if doing some heavy labor where there was
no weight. "Ah-h-h! Right! What do you want?"

"I want you back in the ship," said McCauley sternly.

More clankings. They were the type of sound that might be heard inside
an air-filled space suit and picked up by its helmet microphone.

"What are you doing?" demanded McCauley.

"I'm fixing ... uh!..." The last was a grunt. "I'm fixing a way to
settle something.... I'm set now."

"Fallon!" barked McCauley. "Come to the ship immediately! That's an
order!"

"I'm busy," said Fallon's voice, defiantly. "But I'll tell you
something! I'm not going back to Earth with the rest of you. I was on
the run when I passed myself off as somebody else and got on the ship.
I was on the run from Death Row in the pen. They had me ready for the
hot seat in two days more, and I got away. Why should I go back to
Earth?"

He paused. And then he said, his tone indescribable:

"Everybody is hearing me. I fixed that! I doctored the aerial switch so
when it's turned on it can't be turned off again! McCauley can't keep
you from hearing me now, because he called me! And McCauley's going to
squirm now! I joined up with him to wipe out every one of you, so we
could go back to Earth with the atom fuel to sell to contacts he's got!
He tried to kill Soames and he tried to kill Hathaway! He tried to kill
me today, by getting me lost, but the rest of you jumped to help me and
he had to join in so you wouldn't know what he'd tried!"

McCauley winced.

"Poor fool!" Randy said.

"Now listen," said Fallon's voice fiercely. "I've told you the truth.
If I'd told you before you wouldn't've believed me. But you're going to
believe me now, because I've scrapped my chance of living--it wasn't
good anyhow--to tell you! You watch McCauley! Send word back to Earth
of what I've told you. He'll not dare to do a thing when a dying man's
accused him--and that's what I am!"

"Fallon!" barked McCauley again. "It's a mistake! You thought I planned
that stuff, and I was just playing along with you! The others knew all
about it! They knew everything you just told them! It's a lie! I'm not
planning anything. I just played along with you...."

"Yes?" jeered Fallon. "Tell that to the aviators! The spacemen don't
believe you!" Then he said: "So what? I'll be the first man on Mars!
I'm Joe Fallon, 4272365, Walla Walla Penitentiary, and I'll go down in
the history books. I'm taking off for Mars. Want to race?"

There was a sudden roaring. It was the sound of a rocket blast,
conducted by metal to a space suit and picked up by the microphone
inside.

"T-taking off," gasped Fallon, outside. "You get this story back to
Earth and he won't dare do anything! He won't dare! But I didn't rat on
him! Only on what he was going to do."

After that, there was only the roar of the rocket blast.

They poured out of the ship in space suits as fast as the air lock
would let them. Perhaps some of them had a faint, faint hope that it
was merely a joke. But it wasn't. There were boxes and bales floating
heavily, soggily, in the emptiness about Eros. They had been thrust
aside when Fallon took the rocket for himself. And he was gone.

McCauley made an irresolute movement back toward the ship, and Randy
said quickly, via space phone:

"No use, Ed! We can't make more than six gees acceleration in the ship,
and in a loadless rocket he'll make twelve! We can't catch him!"

And there'd be nothing they could do if they did catch him. McCauley
ground his teeth, staring at the star-filled sky.

"I did something wrong," he said bitterly. "Something wrong! But what
would have been the right thing?"

Hathaway said enviously:

"He'll be the first man on Mars, at that! But his air won't last all
the way. He'll coast in and crash and never know it. But he'll be the
first man on Mars!"

"Yes," said Randy wryly, "he'll have that.... Let's get these last
rockets off and land at a respectful distance behind him."

And they did.

Of course, as everyone knows, the First Martian Expedition was a
great success. Of the six men who left on it, five came back. They
had maps and photographs and petrological samples, and a complete and
surprisingly reasonable explanation of the canals and oases about
which astronomers had argued for the best part of a century. They even
brought back a sluggish, naked, squirming creature which initiated an
entirely new line of biological research.

McCauley began a battle behind closed doors, and Randy helped him,
and in time a curious error in the public records appeared. It is
officially stated in all the books that one Joe Fallon was the first
man to land on Mars, though the first records of the Expedition gave
his name as Andrew--at least Fallon the crewman was not named Joe.
There is a strange lethargy in official quarters. Nobody bothers to
correct the records.

"Of course," said McCauley to Randy, "he stole our watches, but he was
a pretty decent character at that, considering. He'd have no part in
taking your lives."

"What was he sentenced for?" asked Randy suddenly.

"First-degree murder," said McCauley shortly. "I was curious too. I
asked." Then he said, "They're talking about trying to make Jupiter,
Randy. It seems to me that if we try, we can get to go on that job.
What do you say?"

Randy grinned. He put out his hand and they shook on it.

       *       *       *       *       *

    (When Ed McCauley was a very young officer--in fact a new-made first
    lieutenant, space travel was only for robots. Nobody'd ever ridden
    out of the atmosphere in a rocket, and nobody'd ever piloted a ship
    into orbital flight and landed it again; there wasn't a Space
    Platform, and the moon bases hadn't been built. There was constant
    danger from cosmic rays and flare particles, and nobody dreamed of
    trying to reach either Venus or Mars.

    By the time McCauley was a colonel, all those things had been done.
    But oddly enough, it didn't seem that the job was finished. The more
    that was done, the more remained to be done. And McCauley found
    that things never got any more settled down. There was Venus to be
    explored, right next door, and Mercury just beyond that. And Titan
    looked promising, and of course there were the asteroids, of which
    one or two urgently required examination. And even when there were
    settlements on Saturn and Uranus and Neptune, there were rumors of
    a planet beyond Pluto.... And after that, the stars.

    There'd never be any end to the journeyings of men into space.)

       *       *       *       *       *

TODAY: SATELLITES

TOMORROW: THE OUTER GALAXIES


MEN INTO SPACE is the thrilling story of man's gradual conquest of
outer space. Starting with the rockets of today, the story moves on
to trace the development of the Space Platform and spaceships. It
concludes with the first successful attempts to land on the Moon ...
Mars ... and points beyond....

The entire story is seen through the eyes of young Ed McCauley, whose
adventures in outer space will excite you with the sheer wonder of
man's daring in the Space Age.

MEN INTO SPACE is based on the popular television series starring
William Lundigan.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEN INTO SPACE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

