The Project Gutenberg eBook of Men into space, by Murray Leinster

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Men into space

Author: Murray Leinster

Release Date: November 6, 2022 [eBook #69299]

Language: English

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEN INTO SPACE ***





                            MEN INTO SPACE

                          By Murray Leinster

         COPYRIGHT © 1960 BY ZIV TELEVISION PRODUCTIONS, INC.

      [Transcriber's Note: Extensive research did not uncover any
  evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

                         _All rights reserved_

                    BERKLEY EDITION, OCTOBER, 1960

               _BERKLEY MEDALLION BOOKS are published by
                  The Berkley Publishing Corporation
                101 Fifth Avenue, New York 3, New York_

                Printed in the United States of America




                           _IN OUTER SPACE_

There was no sensation of weight. Nothing weighed anything. Nothing
could be considered light or heavy. The difference in weight between
a copper penny and the ship itself was imaginary. They had different
masses, but both would weigh the same--zero. McCauley suddenly turned
off the silent air-circulator of the cabin. He struck a match. The
flame flared, but not as a rising leaf-shape. It was a perfect ball of
incandescence. But it did not continue to burn. It went out, and a ball
of white smokiness remained where the flame had been....



                           _MEN INTO SPACE_




                                  _1_


    (When Ed McCauley was a very young officer--in fact, a new-made
    first lieutenant, space travel was restricted to robots. They did
    good work, for robots, but it wasn't enough. No man had ever gone
    up in a rocket. Nobody had ever gone up--let alone land safely. So
    the time came when somebody had to. And in those very early days
    McCauley volunteered for the job and managed to get it.)

First Lieutenant Ed McCauley opened his eyes and looked at the ceiling,
wondering drowsily why this morning seemed so much more satisfying
and important than any other. He'd had a good sleep, even though he
remembered vaguely that he'd had a hard time dropping off. Now the
sunlight came through the window blind in slatted streaks, the wall was
a pale tan, and he was lying on an iron cot, his uniform neatly draped
over a chair. Then he heard voices and the clattering of china, and
suddenly he remembered where he was and what was important about today.

Today was the day of the shoot. The rocket shoot. It wasn't going to
be big and spectacular, with a multiple-stage giant looming so high
that a man couldn't see the payload capsule on top without his neck
creaking. There'd be no giant gantry crane hovering over a slim but
monstrous missile with its hundreds of plugged-in wires recording
the performances of some tens of thousands of separate parts, all of
which had to work perfectly if one part were to be any good. Even the
electric wires had to pull clear perfectly when the gantry crane rolled
back a matter of seconds before the end of the count down.

No. This shoot wouldn't be spectacular. There weren't even any
reporters around. Official Service cameramen would record what
happened; and if all went well there'd be plenty of excitement about
it later, and if all didn't go well it wouldn't matter too much. This
time there was no publicity buildup. Nobody'd be disappointed if things
went wrong. The only person who'd feel badly was First Lieutenant Ed
McCauley, and he wouldn't feel it too keenly. In fact, he wouldn't feel
anything.

He'd be dead.

He considered the idea for a moment, but when a person is First
Lieutenant McCauley's age, dying is something that happens to somebody
else. You can't imagine it happening to you. It's a sort of reverse of
being born, but you can't imagine that either, though it happened.

He sat up and kicked his feet over the side of the cot. He felt a
little bit relieved. He was excited, now that he remembered what was
in the works for today, but it wasn't a solemn feeling. He got up and
looked at himself in the small square mirror over the washstand. He
looked exactly as he always did. He felt the same way. Well-l, maybe
a little more awake and alive than usual, because he'd been horribly
afraid that something would happen and the shoot would be called off.
But it hadn't--so far.

He went down the hall to the showers, trailing a towel over his
shoulder. He showered, thinking zestfully about the prospects. There'd
be no trouble about the weather. At this base clouds were exceptional
and a cloud cover that hindered even visual tracking was almost
unknown. Suddenly he wanted to sing, but he restrained himself. As
lucky as he felt, it might sound like showing off.

The door of the shower room opened and somebody came in.

"Hi, National Hero. You in there?" It was Randy's voice, slightly
sardonic.

"Ain't nobody here but us chickens, boss," McCauley answered
cheerfully. "Nary a hero."

Randy grunted.

"How d'you feel, Ed?"

"Wet," said McCauley. He turned off the shower and began to towel
himself. When he emerged, Randy searched his face, his anxiety showing
on his own.

"Nope," said McCauley, "the condemned man's got a good appetite for
breakfast. Quit worrying about me, Randy!"

"If you'd only slipped on your soap and broken your doggone neck,"
Randy complained, "a good guy might've gotten a chance to take your
place!"

McCauley grinned. Randy would give his eyeteeth to take his place
today. Anybody would. McCauley still worried that even now something
would spoil things, but he'd been worrying for months. He'd been jumpy
ever since the rumor first went around that sometime soon somebody was
going up in a rocket and coming down again. Nobody ever had. Up to this
morning it was still waiting to be done. But somebody--in fact, he
himself--should do it today. This was why today was the most special
day of his life.

Back in his quarters he shaved, marveling at the luck of the man he saw
in the mirror. Three--four--five months ago he'd been telling himself
that he didn't have a chance of being picked, even though he was sure
he'd put in for it as soon as anybody had. He'd hoped he'd been the
first to apply, but actually he was one of two hundred. They'd winnowed
the applicants, though, and four months ago twenty were left, and then
only ten. Now there was only himself in first place, with four other
bitterly envious characters--Randy was one of them--wishing he'd break
his neck so they could go in his place.

But nothing like that would happen if he could help it. Washing the
shaving soap off his face, he found himself praying that everything
would go all right. He didn't think of asking that he come down safely;
after all, he could insure his safety by backing out. He just asked
that he'd be all right when they checked him over, and that the count
down would go all right, and that he'd get up to where the sky turned
purple and then black and he saw the stars shining bright, with the sun
among them as the nearest and greatest star of all. And he prayed that
he'd do the right things while he was up there so the shoot would be a
success.

He settled his uniform and went to breakfast. Randy had ordered for him
and was waiting. Randy still looked worried. He'd tried hard for the
job for himself, but now he was afraid that his friend McCauley might
not check out. That the rocket might not check out. That when he got
up there something might go wrong. That coming down would be bad.

"Soft-boiled," said McCauley appreciatively, breaking an egg. "My
favorite fruit!"

"Do you really feel okay, Ed?" asked Randy.

McCauley grinned again, which was answer enough. Maybe he felt too
good. He probably should tone down a little. After all, this shoot
with a man as the payload wasn't a pleasure trip. It was research. It
was an operation to verify other research. The medicos believed they
knew what the psychological, physiological, and emotional effects of
long-continued weightlessness would be. They needed to know how a
normal man like McCauley would react to the unparalleled environment
of nearer space. It was high-altitude research, primarily to enable
planes to fly faster. A plane could be powered right now so that its
wings would melt at sea level because of the heat its speed produced.
The only way to reach theoretical top speed in a plane was to fly it
away up. There was a thermal barrier to really high-speed flight. The
only way around this barrier was over it, and it was necessary to
find out how a man would make out in that detour. The Service had a
long-established custom of spending a dollar instead of a man; now it
had not to spend a man perhaps, but to risk one. And McCauley was the
man.

He felt remarkably good, knowing that presently he should be where no
man had ever been before, seeing with his own eyes that the earth was
round. It struck him suddenly that everybody else in the world had only
indirect evidence for believing this. He'd be the first man to know
this for a fact simply because he'd gone up to where he would see the
earth as a ball.

"No shivers?" asked Randy presently, as if in envy. "Wouldn't you
rather not and say you did? I'll take over for you!"

"Don't tempt me!" said McCauley, pushing his cup across the table. "And
how about some more coffee?"

Randy grunted. Maybe he'd been ordered to do some kidding, so McCauley
wouldn't get the wind up. But it didn't matter to Ed. If only
everything went all right at the blockhouse everything would have to
go all right all along the line. But the chance that things might
be fouled up there made him want to keep his fingers crossed. Yes.
The blockhouse was the big hurdle. Anything that happened after that
wouldn't be failure on his part. He wanted to pray again, this time
about the blockhouse. But he didn't.

The two men left the officers'-quarters building together. There was a
jeep waiting, with Sergeant Hall at its wheel.

"Mornin', Lieuten't. How you feeling?"

The sergeant looked at McCauley with the same combination of envy and
anxiety that Randy had shown--envy for what McCauley had ahead of him,
anxiety for whether he felt all right so that he could go through with
it.

"Look!" said McCauley, annoyed. "I'm all right! There's nothing to
worry about! The thing's been done before with instruments, dummies,
monkeys, and now it's me. I'm just another ape. That's all! For the
love of Saint Aloysius stop worrying!"

Sergeant Hall let in the clutch.

"Okay, Lieuten't," he said mildly. "I was just going to wish you good
luck."

"Cross your fingers against the medics," said McCauley dourly. "I never
liked doctors. I've got to get by some of them."

He settled back in the jeep and it went bolting out into the already
blazing sunlight beyond the shadow of the building.

The landscape wasn't pretty--sun-baked clay and sand on the road,
and mesquite and more mesquite all around. The sunshine was hotter
here than anywhere else in the world. It was still long before noon,
but already the horizon shimmered in the heat and occasional little
sand-devils rose up half-heartedly and then subsided as if it were too
hot even for whirlwinds. Far away there were the mountains. McCauley
had gone over there once, and they'd towered impossibly toward the sky.
But presently he'd have trouble picking them out because they'd be
so small and the ground so nearly flat. Heat beat up from the ground
and through the windshield. After a quarter of an hour he could see
the spindly launching tower--no gantry cranes here!--above one of the
ridges over which the jeep went rolling, kicking up a monstrous cloud
of yellow dust behind it.

McCauley didn't mind the heat. He felt remarkably aware of being alive
and breathing, of the sunlight, and of a wrinkle in his pants on the
jeep seat. After a little he saw the flat roof of the blockhouse. Then
he felt scared. He was afraid of the blockhouse. There'd be a last
checkup to make sure he was perfectly all right, perfectly normal, no
more tense than the doctors decided was allowable, and so on. His heart
began to pound a little and he agonized over it. If they decided it was
acting queer....

He found himself praying again. Please, God, don't let them find
anything wrong with me! I want so much to do this!

Randy didn't look at him. A good guy, Randy. He'd know it was panic
over those doggone doctors poking stethoscopes at him and going off to
mutter together about what they'd heard.

"Randy, if I look scared, it's because I am," McCauley said between
his teeth. "There's a medic in that blockhouse who wanted his
brother-in-law to get this job. He'd be just the kind to mess me up
now!"

Randy offered a cigarette. McCauley shook his head.

The blockhouse was sunk in the dry earth. It was concrete, yards thick,
with nothing visible from this side except a deep-sunk door in the
wall. On the other side there was a narrow slit to look out of, and
there were periscopes and in a pit over yonder the close-by trackers.
There were other trackers in other spots--as far away as the mountains.
But there wasn't much of anything to be seen here.

... No. There was the rocket. One of the new big Aerobees. Nothing
fancy about it. The Atlas and the long-distance jobs generally
got all the publicity these days. But the Aerobees were solid and
workmanlike, veteran performers. Fancy hardware broke the records and
was what people meant when they talked about missiles and rockets, but
Aerobees were the workhorses that went up without fanfare, got the
information they were sent up for, and got it back down again. It was
an Aerobee that had proved matter-of-factly that most of the stuff in
the textbooks about the upper air simply wasn't so. Aerobees were the
first to disprove the belief that the tropopause was a motionless,
featureless calm belt up aloft. Aerobees brought back conclusive
evidence of vertical currents in that supposed utter calm, currents
that shot upward at three hundred meters per second. And it was
Aerobees that brought back proof of ultraviolet light reaching Earth
on its dark side, so the theory boys could go quietly mad figuring out
where the light came from.

Yes. The pointed nose and sleek shape of the Aerobee was a comfort,
standing by its straight-up launching tower. McCauley'd seen dozens of
shoots of Aerobees. He felt the affection a man feels for something
that does its job competently and casually, day in and day out, when
called upon to do it.

The jeep stopped. Randy got out and McCauley followed him. The sergeant
opened his mouth but thought better of it. He drove away without saying
anything more about luck.

The doorway of the blockhouse was cool. Inside, as the door closed
behind him, McCauley felt the air-conditioned chill and the clatter
of the place almost as if he'd been struck a blow. There were people
everywhere. Practically everybody wore a phone headset and chest
microphone and everybody was talking to somebody somewhere else, paying
no attention to anyone nearby.

McCauley stood still, waiting to be told where to go. Somebody called
to him:

"The docs aren't ready for you yet, Lieutenant. You're early."

"Okay," McCauley said. "Where'll I go to get out of the way?"

It didn't look as if anybody else could possibly wait around in the
blockhouse without further fouling up the already-present confusion.

"Let's go look at the transportation," Randy suggested.

McCauley shrugged and followed Randy outside. It was comforting that
nobody paid any attention to him. At least the people in charge of the
shoot weren't worrying about his not being okayed for the job.

In the sunshine again, he saw familiar things. The close-by trackers
in their pits, sunk below ground level in case something blew. The
telemeter receivers looked like huge wire bowls, decorated with rolls
of toilet tissue, aimed at the sky. They moved back and forth, testing.
They'd get back telemetered information and sort it out and make
tapes of it, and whoever read those tapes would know more about what
was happening than McCauley did. A telemetering system will sample a
practically indefinite number of instrument readings three hundred
times a second and send back the information in wild banshee howls or
else in scratchy noises that sound like all the static in the world
coming out of one loud-speaker.

Even so, things were better than they used to be, for there was a
time when not nearly so much information got back. For that matter,
McCauley'd heard about the tame German scientist--formerly of
Peenemünde--who used to stand out in the open behind the blockhouse
when those first rockets went up, sweating and squinting and saying,
"Goot!" "Goot!" as long as he could see that things were going well,
and sputtering despairingly and unintelligibly in German when they went
wrong.

They went wrong pretty often in the beginning, back ten years or so
ago. There was the time a rocket went up and simply vanished. All the
trackers lost it and nobody had the least idea where it'd gone. All the
men sat around biting their nails and wondering where in blazes it was.
Finally there'd been a telephone call from a woman in Alamogordo. She'd
managed to reach someone with authority to route her call though to the
blockhouse.

"Ah hear you folks are shootin' up rockets," she said in an indignant
drawl. "Well, you-all better come an' get your rocket outa my backyard
right now!"

It had landed in her backyard, many miles away, and it had missed her
house by no more than twenty feet.

Another time--a long, long while ago--a V-2 tied itself into knots and
headed for Mexico. When it came down near Juarez, all the Mexicans for
miles around came on the run with hacksaws. After they'd cut off pieces
of it for "space souvenirs," there wasn't much left to be hauled back
to base....

McCauley followed Randy around to the front. They walked over the hot
sandy ground to the launching tower. There was a fuel truck there, and
the sickly-sweet but bitter smell of hydrazine. The fueling gang wore
plastic coveralls with hoods and clear plastic faceplates. McCauley
knew this process; he'd helped with it. But today he kept carefully
out of the way. The fueling gang was finicky about its work. Each man
was extravagantly careful not to spill a drop of hydrazine, because if
somebody stepped on a drop that had spilled and then, later on, stepped
on a drop of nitric that had spilled, he'd have a hotfoot to end all
hotfoots--on that foot, anyhow, because he wouldn't have it any longer.

The hydrazine topped off. The truck went away, with everything
carefully closed up lest a drop of anything spill on to the ground. The
fueling gang went to change coveralls, for they wore coveralls of a
different color when they were going to load up the nitric acid. Never
the twain--hydrazine and nitric--should meet until pumped together into
a rocket engine.

The Aerobee was tall and sleek and smooth and streamlined, but now
there were ladders leaning against it. Somebody was working through a
door in the sidewall. McCauley went around and glanced at the guide
rail. The Aerobee used a short-time booster to start up. The booster
ran up the rail to the top of the launching tower and then landed
somewhere nearby. But the Aerobee would keep on going. By the time it
reached the top of the tower and the end of the guide rail, it should
be going fast enough for its fins to have some grip on the air. When
the air got too thin to be of any use, the steam-jets working from the
fin tips should guide it.

The nitric acid truck came slowly into position. It didn't cross
the track the hydrazine truck had taken, and stopped in an
entirely different place; the fueling crew reappeared, in their
different-colored plastic coveralls. The precautions taken against the
premature introduction of hydrazine and nitric acid were remarkable.

McCauley let himself look up once at the nose-cone. He'd tried it on
for size before. In it, he was going to have to take the launching jolt
of more gees than any jet pilot has to be prepared for. But he felt a
serene confidence that he could do it.

Then somebody called:

"Hey! Lieutenant! They want you back at the blockhouse!"

McCauley turned back obediently. The fuel gang was pumping in the
nitric as he left. It stank, and he knew that if the smell gets under
the faceplate of your hood you throw back the hood and faceplate
together and gasp for breath. He realized that he wasn't breathing too
easily. The doctors were going to make their final check on him, and
what they said would be it. He felt the familiar panicky conviction
that they'd find something wrong with him. For instance, panic would be
something wrong.

He caught hold of himself as he and Randy entered the blockhouse.
Somehow the confusion and busyness of everybody there were reassuring.
On the way to where the doctors waited, he heard people talking into
telephones about wind velocities and barometric pressures and how in
thunder did that civilian automobile get into the test area? Somebody
had to get it out fast, because there was a shoot on, in case nobody'd
heard. The last was pure sarcasm.

Anyhow the technical crew thought he was all right. So McCauley
submitted himself to the doctors in a sort of truculent readiness to
put up an argument if they said anything critical of his condition or
his readiness to go where nobody had ever gone before. With everything
else all ready, they'd have a nerve to suggest anything but a go-ahead!

They took his blood pressure and did a cardiogram, and they put a tape
around his chest and a stylus drew a crazy curve which showed the
way he was breathing. Then they took samples of his breath and his
blood and other body fluids, and his temperature and the electrical
resistance of his skin and forty-seven other things. They'd done all
this before. They'd done it while he was resting and while he was
taking hard exercise, when he was tired and when he'd just waked up
from a good night's sleep.

They had blown-up pictures of every square inch of his skin, so they
could check for sputters at high altitude. A sputter might occur if
a cosmic particle at just the right speed happened to hit him. He
hadn't any privacy left. The docs knew everything about him, except
that he was absolutely the right person for man's first ascent in a
pure rocket, and his return to Earth in one piece. No rocket had ever
landed intact, of course. They smashed. Invariably. But a way had been
worked out to get instruments back unshattered. That was the way he'd
land.

One of the doctors nodded.

"With that pulse rate your system's pumping out plenty of adrenalin.
That's good!"

McCauley relaxed a little. He watched as they checked his reflexes. He
could tell that they looked all right, anyway. They gave him a pencil
and timed him while he did a page of IQ stuff. In the past few weeks
they'd established his personal norm for all sorts of things, and now
they were checking to see whether anticipation pushed him too far
off normal. He began to sweat when he realized that he needed to act
exactly as usual, and they knew it, and he sweated more because of it.
They checked him over as they would a guinea pig before an experiment,
only he was the guinea pig. But he was desperately anxious for all this
to be over and for the experiment to start.

Presently they finished and looked at each other and nodded. Then one
of them said, "You'll do," and McCauley went almost sick with relief.
Then, infuriatingly, he knew from their expressions that they'd looked
for exactly that reaction. He couldn't do anything they wouldn't
